Kubernetes

simple js app example :

---------- Node & pod

Node: simple server, physical or virtual machine
Pod: an abstraction over a container (docker container).
Usualy 1 container per pod.

each pod gets its own ip adress
pods can die (they are ephemeral) -> a new adress is created everytime pods restarts

Service: static ip adress that never changes

Externa Service: service to access our app from outside (a browser)
-> http://124.89.101.2:8080 ip of the node machine + port.

Ingress -> permets de forwarder un nom de domaine public avec un protocole sécure
vers les services internes du pod.

ConfigMap: external configuration of your application
DB_URL = mongo-db-service

Secret: like config map but used to store secret data
-> encoded in base64
DB_USER = mongo-user
DB_PSWD = mongo-pwd
certificate = ..

we can use it as environment variables inside our app.


---------- Volumes

Volumes // like docker
Storage on local machine or remote (cloud storage oustide of the kbernetes cluster)

Kubernetes doesn't manage data persistence !!

--------- Replicate our app
on clone Nodes

Service : 2 functionalitises : permanent ip, load balancer -> will use a pod that is not busy

StatefulSet -> for stateful app
should be created with StatefullSet, not Deployment
for db consistency

db are often hosted outise K8s cluster

---------------------------- basic architecture of Kubernetes

Master node, slave Nodes

Slaves:
A node has a container runtime (ex docker) and kublet
kublet is responsable to start the pod and run the container

kube proxy: responsible for forward the request from a pod to another
 
Master:
-api server
user talks with the master with an api Server to start a deployement for example
-> forward to the slave Nodes.

-scheduler to schedule the creation of a new pod on the must available Node (scheduler will choose)

-controller manager : controls the scheduler automatically if a pod went down

- etcd : cluster brain (key, value store) where the states of each pods is saved


we can have 2+ instances of master nodes they will share the same api server and the same etcd key value storage

in very little cluster for example : 2 Master nodes, 3 slave nodes


-------------------- minicube, kubectl

docker runtime through virtual box
-> 1 Node K8s cluster

kubectl : command line tool for K8s cluster
create pods, destroy pods, etc..

kubectl get nodes : show the nodes and their status, master or slaves
kubectl version : show the kubernetes version

kubectl create --help

// we don't create pods directly we use an abstraction like deployement
kubectl create deployment NAME --image=image [--dry-run] [options]

// going to pull nginx image from docker hub 
kubectl create deployment nginx-depl --image=nginx

kubectl get deployment: list all deployments created

kubectl get pods: we can see our nginx pod and its status
kubectl get replicaset: the deployment created one replicaset by default (configurable in options)

everything below deployment should be managed automatically by K8s

Abstractions:
deployment
replicaset
pod
container

kubectl edit deployment nginx-depl
// we can change the image version here, if the config file changes, a new pod is created and started
to replace the old one, same for replicaset.

kubctl logs podname: see the logs of a pod, like to debug an error on mongo connection
kubectl describe pod podname: get more infos for a particular pod

kubectl exec -it podname --bin/bash: starts an interactive terminal inside this pod

kubctl delete deployment deployment-NAME

kubectl apply -f [file name] // a yaml config file

see nginx-deployment.yaml file.
name is the deployment name, first spec is the deployment spec (how many replicaset.. etc)
second spec is the pod spec

if i want to change something on this created deployment, i can just change my config file
and apply again.

we can do that for any Kubernetes components

-------------------------------

specs are dependant of the kind choosen in a yalm config file.
etcd holds the current status of any K8s components

pods match its label through selector: attribute. (see specs: of pod in config file)
in the service config file, we use the selector: attribute to link to the pod

targetPort: on the service should match the containerPort: attribute on the deployment/containers config file.


kubectl apply -f serviceName
kubectl get service

kubectl describe service serviceName
-> show endpoints of the service wich should match the ip of the pod

kubectl get pod -o wide // shows output ip idresses of the pods wide shows more infos
we can see the endpoints of the services matches the two pods of our deployment

kubectl get deployment deploymentName -o yaml
> nginx-deployment-result.yaml // get the resulting status in a yaml file.

kubectl delete -f [deploymentName file]
kubectl delete -f [serviceName file]


-------------------------------- DEMOS with two full apps -------------------------

first 1 mongodb pod: internal service
config map, secret => deployment.yaml

second 1 pod mongo Express: external service

flow: request from browser : go to mongo express external service : go to mongo express pod :
go to mongodb internal service : go to mongodb pod

--- : file separation syntax in yaml. Used to create 2 components inside the mongo-deployment.yaml file.

kubectl get all | grep mongodb

configMap can be shared by multiple components. (avoid to change mongodb url value twice)

in yaml file
get values from configmap
valueFrom: 
            configMapKeyRef:

get values from secret
valueFrom: 
            secretKeyRef:

nodePort on externalService is the port that a browser will address to use our pod.
must be between a range: 30000, 32767

A load balancer type of a service is used to loadBalance requests and to forward to an external ipadress
this is why we had to specify the nodePort
in minicube the external-ip is assigned to the service of type LoadBalancer by doing :
minikube service name-of-the-service

